[Music]
hello good morning welcome to breakfast
with louise minchin
and roger johns our headlines for you
today are back in the eye of the storm
there are now more
coveted patients in england's hospitals
than there were
at the peak in the spring 1500 military
personnel will help secondary schools
and colleges in england to carry out
mass testing from next week
good morning boxing a onwards is
supposed to be bumper in retail but not
this year
how the high street's been faring at the
end of a roller coaster period
good morning in sport a coronavirus
outbreak in the manchester city squad
forces the postponement of last night's
premier league match with everton
it was cooled off just four hours before
kickoff
good morning we've got a wintry mix
today of some rain some sleet and some
snow
there's also quite a lot of ice around
this morning so slippery surfaces and
the potential for some travel disruption
i'll have more details
in about 10 minutes
[Music]
well good morning it's a tuesday the
29th of december our main story for you
hospitals in england are now treating
more coronavirus patients than at
any other point in the pandemic as
numbers surpass
the peak that was seen in april it once
again shows the stress that the nhs is
under
with the head of nhs england saying that
health workers
are back in the eye of the storm keith
doyle reports
health services across the uk are being
stretched as they deal with increasing
numbers of patients with covid
in london accident and emergency
departments are reporting intense
pressure
in scotland doctors say there's a danger
that services will be overwhelmed
in wales a situation in hospitals is
described as incredibly challenging and
in northern ireland the health minister
said the next few days is a crucial
period
the stark messages show the impact the
covet virus is having
i was on on christmas day and it was
wall-to-wall coverage
so we see patients who are coming in who
are have
covered symptoms but we also see other
patients coming in with other problems
who turn out to be covered positive and
between that
there is a great deal of difficulty
getting those patients
through into the wards in england the
number of people being treated for the
virus in hospital
is over twenty thousand higher than the
previous peak of around nineteen
thousand in april
although more testing is being done now
than it was then
over forty one thousand new cases were
reported yesterday
a record with 357 deaths
nhs providers said some trusts were
reporting up to three times the number
of covert patients
than at the peak of the first wave the
pressure is having a real effect
in many hospitals the rising number of
covet patients means staff are being
redeployed
and more routine operations and
procedures are being postponed
sadly it's inevitable that as the
infections rise
and the emissions rise that actually we
see disruption to other services
we're desperate our members are
desperate to keep that
disruption as low as possible but
unfortunately
some of our elective and planned
services will be disruptive both in
hospitals and in other settings as well
acknowledging the work that health
workers are doing the head of the nhs in
england has given a message to staff
who he said have had a very tough year
by
late spring we think that with vaccine
supply continuing to come on stream
we will have been able to offer all
vulnerable people
across this country discovered
vaccination and that
perhaps provides the biggest of
hope for the year ahead
tomorrow the tier levels in england will
be reviewed
across the uk health ministers have
pleaded with people to stay home for new
years
sticking to the restrictions in place
the challenges for the health services
over the next days and weeks
are immense keith doyle bbc news
so testing time for health workers at 10
past eight we're going to hear from two
nhs staff about what it's like at the
moment working
on the front line military personnel are
to provide remote support to schools and
colleges with coronavirus testing
programmes as they reopen in england
from next week
1500 armed forces staff from local
response teams will provide telephone
and online advice
about setting up testing facilities as
catherine stanchettan reports
as spring term starts next week
secondary schools should look different
with full coronavirus testing facilities
on site
but setting them up is a big task so big
in fact
that some education leaders have said
it's simply not possible
in such a short space of time now the
ministry of defence has announced it's
stepping in
to help with that effort in total
1500 armed forces personnel are being
made available to support
schools and colleges they'll form local
response teams
providing advice on the testing process
and the setup of testing sites
it will be mostly done remotely by phone
or online meetings
but teams will also be on standby to
provide help in person if needed
the majority of the tests will be
carried out by the pupils themselves
the military has already assisted with
other testing programs around the
country
including the mass lateral flow pilot in
liverpool
these fresh resources are part of the
government's plan to get children back
in the classroom
through a staggered start post christmas
giving schools time to get prepared
it says physical attendance has to be a
priority
but teaching unions and some virus
experts have called for a rethink
amid rising coronavirus cases saying all
pupils should stay at home
to help prevent an even more difficult
january
catherine stancheshan bbc news in the
united states president-elect joe biden
says his team is not getting the
cooperation it needs from the trump
administration as he prepares to move
into the white house mr biden was
speaking after a briefing with national
security
and foreign policy aids he criticized
the department of defense for not
providing key information to his team
as it makes the transition to power a
defense spokesman said that the pentagon
had been
completely transparent uh from this week
people aged over 60 in russia will be
offered the sputnik
i think it's five vaccine or is it v
vaccine named after the soviet era
satellite
700 000 doses have so far been released
for domestic use
68 year old president putin is eligible
for the vaccine but interestingly hasn't
yet had it
well let's get more information from our
moscow correspondent steve rosenberg who
joins us now
um so steve tell us about the rollout
what more can you book more do you know
morning
good morning yeah well russian
scientists and russian officials
have been trumpeting the effectiveness
of sputnik v
um you hear all kinds of numbers being
mentioned that it's 92 percent effective
95 percent effective
vladimir putin a few days ago said it
was up to 97 effective
and that's despite the fact that the the
vaccine was controversially registered
in russia
before phase three clinical trials were
complete
basically the vaccine is made up of two
entirely different injections
delivered three weeks apart and because
they're entirely different
that makes it quite challenging to
produce the kind of quantities
that russia would need but this week the
russian government said
that uh it hopes that by the spring 60
percent
of the population will have been
vaccinated and it hopes that by then the
the outbreak will have been brought
under control
well i'm steve thank you very much
indeed from a snowy moscow thank you
hospital admissions for children with
eating disorders in england have risen
by almost a fifth in two years that's
according to new figures
nhs data digital data for england shows
that more than four and a half thousand
young people were given treatment in the
last 12 months
that's up by 19 since 2018.
doctors believe that the increase is
partly due to the mental health toll of
the pandemic
with children being isolated from
friends spending more time on social
media
and no longer feeling in control of
their future
the spanish health minister has said his
country will set up a registry of people
who've refused to be vaccinated against
coronavirus and share it with
other european union nations he said
vaccinations would not be mandatory
and the list of those who've refused to
be inoculated would not
be made public about a third of all
spaniards have said they won't take the
vaccine though that number has been
falling
in recent weeks now vinyl album
sales in the uk are at their highest
level since the early 1990s almost
5 million vinyl lps were purchased
in 2020. that was up by 10 on
last year that's according to figures
from the recording industry body the bpi
the cancellation of live music events
and an appetite for
nostalgia during the pandemic are
thought to be
behind the increase in sales
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news